it's one of those murphy law days
everything that could have gone wrong
did go wrong
you woke up late missed your bus your
co-workers annoy you to no end
and the boss was on your back all day 4
58 p.m
it's finally almost time to go home but
then
the boss comes up to you and says you're
staying late
because of someone else's mistake and a
tight deadline
well you eventually get home exhausted
and in a crummy mood of course
your eyelids feel heavy and you're ready
to sleep on your problems
as they say at first sleep doesn't come
your thoughts are racing you replay
conversations in your head
think of better responses than what you
gave at the moment
all day long and until this moment your
body has been pumping out chemicals that
will ruin your sleep
so let's meet them we'll take a short
trip to your kidneys
see those yellow hat light things
sitting on top those
are your adrenal glands when your
brain's been bombarded by stressors
it sends an order to these glands i
don't like the situation one bit
i need to heighten my senses pupil
dilation to let in more light and
sharpen vision
pain blockers in case i get hurt a
faster heart rate for increased blood
flow to my muscles
in case i need to run away fast from the
stressor come on
pronto um it's usually some
typical office dress it's not like
you're running from a tiger or something
but your body doesn't know that it
treats all stress equally
i mean your palms get sweaty when you're
nervous so you have a better grip
climbing up a tree yep your brain's
running on caveman instincts
anyway with an order from headquarters
your adrenal glands respond by pumping
adrenaline and cortisol into your
bloodstream
hey there they are looks like something
from your high school chemistry class
well they are chemicals more
specifically hormones
they're responsible for those body
changes the brain order
but they get produced because of your
emotional state
you're angry scared worried anxious
under stress basically okay so your
body's been pumping this stuff out all
day
right an adrenaline rush lasts only
about an hour
the main problem now as you lie in bed
wide awake at 1am
being mad at the world because of this
terrible day you've had
is cortisol it takes up to eight hours
for it to completely disappear from your
blood
so if you were tense in the afternoon
your body will still be full of the
stress hormone when it's time for bed
you eventually do fall asleep because
your body just needs the reboot
it knocks you out so it can get that
precious time for cell renewal
tissue repair third shift maintenance
work you can say
but here's the problem when you go to
sleep your brain
processes all the information it
received throughout the day
it needs to sort out what's useful and
what can be sent to the immediately
forgotten archives
hey i sent mine to the shredder
long-term memories of what you encounter
during the day
form when you sleep as well your brain
replays all the experiences you had
so if stress has gone from an infrequent
visitor
to a daily roommate the brain will
surely remember it
you won't get as deep of a sleep either
remember how those stress hormones put
you on high alert
just because you're now unconscious
doesn't mean your body is resting
think of it this way ever stay the night
in an unfamiliar place
maybe a hotel or a friend's house you
might constantly wake
up in the middle of the night it's
because your brain is half awake
on diligent patrol of any possible
threats
that and going to bed stressed out can
have you jolting awake in a cold sweat
yeah nightmares maybe you saw a monster
that had the body of a huge dragon
and your boss's head the beast was
chasing you trying to gulp you down
your co-workers stood nearby laughing at
your cowardice and lack of control
you might wake up in the middle of the
night and grab yourself a snack
that stress hormone increases appetite
and causes cravings for sweet or salty
junk food
because tasty food can make you happy by
triggering dopamine
plus your body wants sugar for energy to
run away from that tiger i mean your
boss that's how living a constantly
stressful life
can actually make you gain weight now
like
adrenaline cortisol does a lot of good
things for the body
it controls salt and water balance blood
pressure
sugar levels and regulates metabolism
but as soon as high levels of it become
part of your daily routine
the real problems start not only weight
gain
but also a weaker immune system and
bones headaches
gut and heart issues so going to bed
grumpy once
won't open up the floodgates to all
these problems doing it all the time
not good morning comes and you feel
awful
you look in the mirror and see the
consequences of your restless night
dark circles poor quality sleep causes
the blood vessels under your eyes to
dilate
and you get that dark hue over time
adrenaline and cortisol can also cause
skin dullness
wrinkles and premature graying you feel
as if you didn't sleep at all
those newly formed long-term memories of
your terrible boss come flooding back
first thing in the morning
you went to bed grumpy and you start the
day off just the same
it's a vicious cycle you take a morning
shower to freshen up and wake yourself
better
but you should have done it last night
an evening shower relaxes your muscles
and helps with temperature control you
cool down when you get out and this
sends a signal to your body
that it's time to sleep you can also
sleep with a heavier blanket
the pressure feels like a big full body
hug
kinda works that way too it triggers the
release of feel-good hormones like
dopamine and serotonin
that second one is key here it helps
produce melatonin the sleep hormone
running or walking a mile will shed that
excess alertness and help you sleep
better too
imagine your body is a car and the
adrenaline is the gas it runs on
the fuel won't just disappear you need
to drive the car for miles to burn the
tank to empty
but don't overdo it too much exercise
can have the opposite effect
you'll be too hyped up to fall asleep
the shower didn't help much because
you're severely sleep deprived
so you grab a double cafe americano to
really get energized
caffeine raises cortisol levels making
you alert and keeping you from dozing
off at this morning's meeting
the dragon boss wouldn't like that but
be
careful caffeine has a five-hour
half-life
so if you drink a cup of coffee at noon
it won't be completely flushed out of
your system
until 10 pm you get to work and the boss
immediately calls you into his office
great here we go again hey listen sorry
for giving you such a hard time
yesterday
i didn't get much sleep the night before
stressing out over some personal stuff
didn't mean to be such a monster and
that's when it hit you
life constantly throws stress at all of
us
it's how we react to it and remedy it
that matters the most
and that realization puts a smile on
your face
for the rest of the day